---
layout: page
title: "3: Character Creator"
nav_order: 3
has_children: true
---

# Chapter 3: Character Creator

In many adventure games, the players generate their characters by rolling dice! In this part of the project, you will implement several class: `Ability`, `AbilityScore`, `Abilities`, and `PlayerCharacter` that will
allow you to create a `Character Creator` `Scene` like the one below (note, it is a 25MB load so it may take a moment to start):

{% include demo.html path="/demos/part3/index.html" %}

# [3.1: Ability Score]

In this chapter, you will define an `Ability` `enum` and an `AbilityScore`
**class** which represents how capable a character is in various situations.

# [3.2: Ability Score Prefab]

In this chapter, you will start begin to work on the **Character Creation**
`Scene` which will display several `AbilityScore`s. To help with this, you will
create an `AbilityScore` `Prefab` that will make it easy to add any number of
`AbilityScore`s to the screen.

# [3.3: Ability Manifest]

In this chapter, you will create an `AbilityManifest` **class** which represents
a collection of each `Ability`. This **class** will ensure that adding new
`Ability` types will automatically be included on a character during creation.

# [3.4: Ability Manifest Prefab]

In this chapter, you will create a `Prefab` to display an `AbilityManifest` to
the screen. You will add this to the **Character Creation** `Scene` and add a
button that allows the user to generate new `AbilityScore`s to populate the
`AbilityManifest`.

# [3.5: Player Character Class]

In this chapter, you will write a `PlayerCharacter` **class** which represents
a player controlled character in Adventure Quest.

# [3.6: Character Creation Controller]

In this chapter, you will add an `Input Field` to your **Character Creation**
`Scene` to allow the player to specify a name for their character. Additionally,
you will add write a `CharacterCreationController` which validates the
character's name and is capable of constructing a `PlayerCharacter` with the
information present in the `Scene`.

# [3.7: Character Portrait]

In this chapter, you will define a `PortraitDatabase` **class** that maintains
a set of images that the player can select when creating their character.

{% include Links.md %}