---
layout: page
title: "3.1: Ability Score"
nav_order: 1
parent: "3: Character Creator"
---

# 3.1: Ability Score Enum

In most table top RPGs, the characters have different attributes that track how
good (or bad) that character is at performing different actions. In Adventure
Quest, these will be called **Abilities** and each **Ability** will have an
**Ability Score** associated with it. In this chapter, you will create an
`AbilityScore` **class** to model these attributes.

<details open markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Table of contents
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
1. TOC
{:toc}
</details>

# 00. Create a Feature Branch

You're about to start a new feature! Before beginning, you should create a
feature branch named `{username}/character-creator`.

{% include GitHub/NewBranch.md branch_name="username/character-creator" %}

# What is an Ability

Much of what a character (or monster) is capable (or incapable) of doing in
Adventure Quest will be determined by their abilities: **Power**, **Speed**, and
**Vitality**.

{: .note } 
In this chapter, you will write a program that supports **Power**,
**Speed**, and **Vitality**. However, with a careful design, you
should be capable of easily adding new abilities (which you will
do in [3.4 Abilities Manifest Prefab]).

## Ability Score

Each ability has a **score** which is an integer between 1 and 30 which can be
used to determine if the character can use items, perform actions, or handle
various situations. Here are a few examples:

* A suit of heavy plate mail armor requires a **Power** score `>= 16`.
* A character with a **Speed** score `>= 15` may acquire the **Dodge** skill
* When a character would be poisoned, if their **Vitality** score is `>= 14`,
  the damage is halved.

These types of checks can be made directly against an **Ability Score**. 

## Ability Score Modifier

Additionally, each **Ability Score** comes with a **Modifier** which determines
a bonus or a penalty that a character receives when performing various actions
using [Dice Notation].

For example:

* A sword might deal `1d6 + Power` damage.
* Fleeing from combat might require `1d20 + Speed >= 15`
* When resting a character might gain `1d4 + Vitality` health.

{% include AbilityScoreModifiers.md %}

# Defining an Ability Type

To begin, we will define an **enumerated** type to represent each of the
different `Ability` type.

1. Create a new C# Script in your `Scripts/Model` folder named `Ability`
2. Replace the entire contents of the `Ability.cs` file with the following definition:

```csharp
namespace AdventureQuest.Character
{
    public enum Ability
    {
        Power,
        Speed,
        Vitality
    }
}
```

That's it! You're done with the `Ability` type!

So, what is an `enum`? It is similar to the `bool` type which can be `true` or
`false`. However, in this case it is defined to have 3 possible options.

In short, an **enumerated type** is a type whose choices are one of a small list
of possible options.

# Organize Your Files

Currently, your `Scripts/Model` folder contains three C# files, `Die.cs`,
`DiceGroup.cs`, and `Ability.cs`. As your project grows, the number of C#
scripts will also grow and it will become important to keep them organized.

One common way to do this is to keep files with the same name spaces within the
same folder.

1. Create a `Dice` folder and move `Die.cs` and `DiceGroup.cs` inside
2. Create a `Character` folder and move `Ability.cs` inside

Before continuing, complete this process for your `Scripts/Controller`,
and `Tests/Model` folders.

# Ability Score Class

With an `Ability` type defined, think about how you might implement an
`AbilityScore` class.

1. In your `Scripts/Model/Character` folder create a new C# Script called `AbilityScore`
2. It should be in the `AdventureQuest.Character` name space
3. It should not be a `MonoBehaviour`
4. It does not need to use any other name spaces

Think about the following questions, then expand the section below.

* What **fields** should an `AbilityScore` use internally to store state?
* What **properties** should an `AbilityScore` expose **publicly**? 
* Which **properties** can be derived from the internal **fields** / other **properties**?
* What **methods** does an `AbilityScore` provide?
* What **parameters** will the `AbilityScore` **constructor** accept?
* How will the **arguments** passed to the **constructor** be validated?

<details markdown="block">
<summary>
<h3 style="display:inline">AbilityScore Declaration (Click to Expand)</h3>
</summary>

Just like `DiceGroup`, there are many ways to implement an `AbilityScore` class. 
If you chose a different set of **properties**, I'd love to hear about them.

I won't try to claim that the **properties** I've chosen here are the best
possible set of **properties**. But, I have attempted to choose properties that
keep the `AbilityScore` **class** as simple as possible.

```csharp
namespace AdventureQuest.Character
{
    public class AbilityScore
    {
        /// <summary>
        /// The minimum possible score value
        /// </summary>
        public const int MIN = 1;
        /// <summary>
        /// The maximum possible score value
        /// </summary>
        public const int MAX = 30;

        /// <summary>
        /// Instantiates an <see cref="AbilityScore"/> specifying the <paramref name="ability"/> and <paramref name="score"/>.
        /// </summary>
        /// <exception cref="System.ArgumentException">If score < AbilityScore.Min or score > AbilityScore.Max</excpetion>
        public AbilityScore(Ability ability, int score)
        {
            // TODO: Implement the constructor
        }

        /// <summary>
        /// The <see cref="Ability"/> associated with this <see cref="AbilityScore"/>.
        /// </summary>
        public Ability Ability { get; }
        /// <summary>
        /// The value of this <see cref="AbilityScore"/>.
        /// </summary>
        public int Score { get;  }
        /// <summary>
        /// The bonus / penalty that is applied when performing an <see cref="AbilityRoll"/> with this <see cref="AbilityScore"/>
        /// </summary>
        public int Modifier { get; }

    }
}
```

{: .note } 
This may be the first time you have seen a `public const`. The
`const` **keyword** tells the compiler that the label (e.g. `MIN`/`MAX`) is a
**CONSTANT**. That is, it is **immutable** and can never change. Defining
`MIN` and `MAX` as `const` values allows us to user them throughout the program
rather than hard coding `1` and `30`.

</details>

# Challenge: Implement the Ability Score class

Using the definition provided, can you finish the implementation
of the `AbilityScore` class?

To give you confidence that your implementation is correct, you should create a
folder called `Tests/Model/Character` and add the following `AbilityScoreTest`
to it.

**Bonus:** Can you implement the `Modifier` **property** using an [Expression body definition]?

<details markdown="block">
<summary>
<h3 style="display:inline">AbilityScoreTest (Click to Expand)</h3>
</summary>

```csharp
using NUnit.Framework;

namespace AdventureQuest.Character
{
    public class AbilityScoreTest
    {

        [Test, Timeout(5000), Description("Tests the AbilityScore constructor")]
        public void TestAbilityScoreConstructor()
        {
            AbilityScore power = new (Ability.Power, 15);
            Assert.AreEqual(15, power.Score);
            Assert.AreEqual(Ability.Power, power.Ability);
            Assert.AreEqual(2, power.Modifier);

            AbilityScore speed = new (Ability.Speed, AbilityScore.MIN);
            Assert.AreEqual(1, speed.Score);
            Assert.AreEqual(Ability.Speed, speed.Ability);
            Assert.AreEqual(-5, speed.Modifier);

            AbilityScore vitality = new (Ability.Vitality, AbilityScore.MAX);
            Assert.AreEqual(30, vitality.Score);
            Assert.AreEqual(Ability.Vitality, vitality.Ability);
            Assert.AreEqual(10, vitality.Modifier);
        }

        [Test, Timeout(5000), Description("Tests that an AbilityScore will be between 1 and 30")]
        public void TestConstructorArgumentException()
        {
            Assert.Throws<System.ArgumentException>(() => new AbilityScore(Ability.Power, AbilityScore.MIN - 1));
            Assert.Throws<System.ArgumentException>(() => new AbilityScore(Ability.Speed, AbilityScore.MAX + 1));
            Assert.Throws<System.ArgumentException>(() => new AbilityScore(Ability.Vitality, AbilityScore.MIN - 10));
            Assert.Throws<System.ArgumentException>(() => new AbilityScore(Ability.Power, AbilityScore.MAX + 10));
            Assert.Throws<System.ArgumentException>(() => new AbilityScore(Ability.Speed, AbilityScore.MIN - 15));
            Assert.Throws<System.ArgumentException>(() => new AbilityScore(Ability.Vitality, AbilityScore.MAX + 15));
        }
    }
}
```
</details>


# Good Time to Commit

If you have not already done so, now would be a good time to make a commit. You just
finished a feature. More specifically, you implemented an `AbilityScore` **class**.

{% include GitHub/CreateCommit.md %}

# What's Next

With an `AbilityScore` **class** in place you can start work on a **Character Creation** `Scene`. 
In [3.2 Ability Score Label], you will make a new `Prefab` defining how an `AbilityScore` will
be displayed in the **Character Creation** `Scene`.

---
{% include Links.md %}